<!--  <../page-segments/288-aa-title.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/288-aa-title.png)


AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL QUARTERLY
Volume 1, Number 4, October 1964

## II. "INVESTIGATIONS INTO LOGICAL DEDUCTION"*

GERHARD GENTZEN

<!--  <../page-segments/288-left.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/288-left.png)


## INTRODUCTION

**G**ERHARD GENTZEN's inaugural disserta-
tion for the University of Göttingen, "*Unter-
suchungen über das logische Schliessen*," of which Mr.
Manfred Szabo here presents an English transla-
tion, is an important step in the deeper analysis of
the logical calculus as it was begun in the thesis of
Jacques Herbrand. In it Gentzen develops a new
form of logical calculus, the "calculus of sequents,"
which he introduces by starting first from a
"natural calculus" and by then transforming it
for his technical purposes. Its central theorem, an
"elimination theorem," is proved in detail in the
first part of the paper. The second part deals with
applications of this elimination theorem as well as
containing the proof of the equivalence of the
calculus of sequents with usual logical
calculus.

The *Untersuchungen* have had a profound
influence on the development of mathematical
logic and proof theory. The treatment of the
calculus of sequents has been extended by Oiva
Ketonen (in Finland) and by Haskell B. Curry (in
the U.S.A.), and the elimination theorem of
Gentzen has been transferred by Kurt Schütte to
the usual logical calculus. The application of the
elimination theorem to proof theory has been
developed by Paul Lorenzen and Kurt Schütte
through the use of "infinitic induction." Lately
Gaisi Takeuti (in Japan) has generalized the
Gentzen calculus to a system of type theory in
which the theory of real numbers can be formalized.
Here the elimination theorem is not yet proved,
but Takeuti shows that upon the assumption of the
generalized elimination theorem the consistency
of his system follows.

Thus Gentzen's *Untersuchungen* are of great

<!--  <../page-segments/288-right.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/288-right.png)


current interest, and an English edition of this
treatise is to be very much welcomed.

PAUL BERNAYS

(Part I)

SYNOPSIS

The investigations that follow concern the
domain of *predicate logic*, called by H-A¹ the "lower
functional calculus." It comprises the types of
inference that are continually used in all parts of
mathematics. What remains to be added to these
are axioms for the various of inference laws to be
considered as being proper to the particular
branches of mathematics, e.g., in elementary
number theory the axioms of the natural numbers,
of addition, multiplication, and exponentiation, as
well as the inference of complete induction, in
geometry the geometric axioms.

In addition to *classical logic* I shall also deal with
*intuitionist logic* as formalized, for example, by
Heyting².

The present investigations into classical and
intuitionist predicate logic fall essentially into two
more closely connected parts.

1. My starting point was this: The formalization
of logical deduction, especially as it has been
developed by Frege, Russell, and Hilbert, is rather
far removed from the forms of deduction used in
practice in mathematical proofs. Considerable
formal advantages are achieved in return. I
intended, first of all, to set up a formal system which
came as close as possible to actual reasoning. The
result was a "*calculus of natural deduction*." ("*NJ*"
for intuitionism, "*NK*" for classical predicate logic.)
This calculus then turned out to have specific pro-
perties; in particular, the "law of the excluded
middle," which intuitionists reject, occupies a
special position.

<!--  <../page-segments/288-zz-footnote.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/288-zz-footnote.png)


* Originally published in the *Mathematische Zeitschrift*, vol. 39 (1935), pp. 176–221. A second part of these investigations
appeared under the same title, *ibid.*, pp. 405–431. The *American Philosophical Quarterly* plans to publish this at a later date. The
present English translation is by Mr. M. E. Szabo (McGill University, Montreal) whose thanks are due to his wife Ann
for her continued encouragement, and to Mr. Michael Dummett of All Souls College, Oxford, for reading the translation
and suggesting improvements.

¹ Hilbert-Ackermann, *Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik*, in this paper referred to as H–A.

² A. Heyting, *Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik und Mathematik*, Sitzungsber. d. Preuß. Akad. d. Wiss., phys.-math.
Kl. 1930, pp. 42–65.

