<!--  <../page-segments/290-left.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/290-left.png)


We assume that an indefinite number of variables
is available; if the alphabet does not suffice, we add
numerical subscripts such as x₇, C₃.

1.3. Boldface and Greek letters serve as "syn-
tactic variables," i.e., not as symbols of the logic
formalized, but as variables of our considerations
*concerning* that logic. Their meaning is explained as
they are used.

2. *Expressions*.

2.1. The concept of a propositional expression,
called a "*formula*" for short (defined inductively):
(The concept of a formula is ordinarily used in a
more general sense; the special case defined below
might thus perhaps be described as a "purely
logical formula.")

2.11. A symbol for a particular proposition (i.e.,
capital letter A and F) is a formula.

A propositional variable followed by a number
(possibly zero) of free object variables is a formula,
e.g., *Abab*.

The object variables are called the *arguments* of
the propositional variables.

Formulae of the two kinds mentioned are also
called *elementary formulae*.

2.12. If A is a formula, then ¬ A is also a
formula.

If A and B are formulae, then A&B, A∨B,
A⊃B are formulae.

(We shall not introduce the symbol ⊃⊂ into
our presentation; it is in fact superfluous, since
A⊃⊂B may be regarded as an abbreviation of
(A⊃B) & (B⊃A).)

2.13. A formula not containing the bound object
variable x yields another formula, if we prefix
either ∀x or ∃x. At the same time we may substi-
tute x in a number of places for a free object
variable occurring in the formula.

2.14. Brackets (or parentheses) are to be used to
show the structure of a formula unequivocally.
Example of a formula:

∃x ( ( (¬Abxa) ∨ Bx) ⊃ (∀ z(A&B) ) )

By special convention the number of brackets
may be reduced, but (with one exception, *vide* 2.4)
no use will be made of this, since we do not have to
write down many formulae.

2.2. The number of logical symbols occurring in
a formula is called the *grade of a formula*. (Thus an
elementary formula is of grade 0.)

The logical symbol of a non-elementary formula
that has been added last, in the construction of the
formula according to 2.11 and 2.12, is called the
*terminal symbol of a formula*.

<!--  <../page-segments/290-right.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/290-right.png)


Formulae that may have arisen in the course of
the construction of a formula according to 2.12 and
2.13, including the formula itself, are called *sub-
formulae*.

Example: the subformulae of A& ∀ xBxa are
A, ∀xBxa, A& ∀xBxa, as well as all formulae of the
form Baa, where a represents any free object
variable (this variable may also be a, for example).
The grade of A& ∀ xBxa is 2, the terminal symbol
is &.

2.3. The concept of a *sequent*:

(This concept will not be used until Section III,
and it is only then that the purpose of its intro-
duction becomes apparent.)

A sequent is an expression of the form

A₁, . . . , Aₙ —→ B₁, . . . , Bᵥ,

where A₁, . . . , Aₙ, B₁, . . . , Bᵥ may represent any
formulae whatever. (The —→, like commas, is an
auxiliary symbol and not a logical symbol.)

The formulae A₁, . . . , Aₙ forms the *antecedent*,
and the formulae B₁, . . . , Bᵥ, the *succedent* of the
sequent. (This sequent may be empty.)

2.4. The sequent A₁, . . . , Aₙ —→ B₁, . . . , Bᵥ has
exactly the same intuitive meaning as the formula

(A₁& . . . &Aₙ) ⊃ (B₁ ∨ . . . ∨ Bᵥ).

(By A₁&A₂&A₃ we mean (A₁&A₂)&A₃, likewise
for ∨ .)

If the antecedent is empty, the sequent reduces
to the formula B₁ ∨ . . . ∨ Bᵥ.

If the succedent is empty, the sequent means the
same as the formula ¬(A₁& . . . &Aₙ) or (A₁& . . .
&Aₙ)⊃F.

If both parts of the formula are empty, the
sequent means the same as F, i.e., a false propo-
sition.

Conversely, to every formula there corresponds
an equivalent sequent, e.g., that one whose
antecedent is empty and whose succedent consists
precisely of that formula.

The formulae making up a sequent are called
*S-formulae* (i.e., sequent formulae). By this we
intend to indicate that we are not considering the
formula by itself, but as it appears in the sequent.
Thus we say, for example:

"A formula occurs in several places in a sequent
as an S-formula"; which may also be expressed as
follows:

"Several distinct S-formulae (which shall simply
mean: in several different occurrences in the sequent)
are formally identical."

