<!--  <../page-segments/291-left.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/291-left.png)


3. *Figures*.

We require inference figures and proof figures.
Such figures consist of formulae or sequents, as
the case may be. In what follows (3.1 to 3.3, 3.5)
we shall be speaking only of formulae, but whatever
is said applies analogously to sequents; all we need
to do is to replace the word "formula," wherever it
occurs, by the word "sequent."

3.1. An *inference figure* may be written in the
following way:

```txt
A₁, . . . , Aᵥ
─────────────  (ν ≥ 1),
      B
```

where A₁, . . . , Aᵥ, B are formulae. A₁, . . . , Aᵥ
are then called the *upper formulae* and B the *lower
formula* of the inference figure. (The concepts of an
upper sequent and of a lower sequent of an infer-
ence figure consisting of sequents are to be under-
stood correspondingly.)

We shall have to consider only particular
inference figures and they will be stated for each
calculus as they arise.

3.2. An inference figure, called a *derivation* for short,
consists of a number of formulae (at least one),
which combine to form inference figures in the
following way: Each formula is a lower formula of
at most one inference figure; each formula (with
the exception of exactly one: the *endformula*) is an
upper formula of at least one inference figure; and
the system of inference figures is non-circular, i.e.,
there is in the derivation no cycle (no series whose
last member is again succeeded by its first member)
of formulae of which each upper formula of an
inference figure has the lower formula as the next
one in the series.

3.3. The formulae of a derivation that are not
lower formulae of an inference figure are called
*initial formulae* of the derivation.

A derivation is in "tree form" if every one of its
formulae is an upper formula of *at most one* inference
figure.

Thus all formulae except the endformula are
upper formulae of *exactly one* inference figure.

We shall have to treat only of derivations in tree
form.

The formulae which compose a derivation so
defined are called *D-formulae* (i.e., derivation
formulae). By this we wish to indicate that we are
not considering merely the formula as such, but
also its position in the derivation. In this sense we
shall be using, for example, expressions such as:

"A formula occurs in a derivation as a *D-
formula*."

<!--  <../page-segments/291-right.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/291-right.png)


"Two distinct *D*-formulae (i.e., formulae occur-
ring merely in distinct places in the derivation) are
formally identical, viz., identical to the same
formula."

By saying "**A is the *same D*-formula as B**" we mean
that **A** and **B** are not only formally identical, but
occur also in the same place in the derivation. We
shall use the words "formally identical" to indicate
identity of form regardless of place.

For object variables, however, we shall not
introduce a special term that would associate the
variable with a specific place of occurrence in the
formula. Thus we say, e.g.: "*The same* object
variable occurs in two distinct *D*-formulae."

3.4. The inference figures of the derivation are
called *D-inference figures* (i.e., derivation inference
figures).

In a derivation consisting of sequents the *S*-
formulae of the *D*-sequents are called *D-S-
formulae* (i.e., derivation sequent formulae).

3.5. A *branch* in a derivation is (following Hilbert)
a series of *D*-formulae whose first formula is an
initial formula and whose last formula is the end-
formula, and of which each formula except the last
is an upper formula of a *D*-inference figure whose
lower formula is the next formula in the branch.

We say that "a *D*-formula stands *above* (*below*)
another *D*-formula" if there exists a branch in
which the former occurs before (after) the latter.

We are here thinking of the fact that a derivation
is written in tree form with the initial formula
above and the endformula below. (Examples may
be found in II, §4).

Furthermore, we say that "a *D*-inference figure
occurs above (below) a *D*-formula," if all formulae
of the inference figure occur above (below) that
*D*-formula.

A derivation with the endformula **A** is also called
a "derivation of **A**."

The initial formulae of a derivation may be *basic
formulae* or *assumption formulae*; more about their
nature will have to be said as we reach the different
calculi.

SECTION II.

THE CALCULUS OF NATURAL DEDUCTION

§ 1

*Examples of Natural Deduction*

We wish to set up a formalism that reflects as
accurately as possible the actual logical reasoning
involved in mathematical proofs.

