<!--  <./segments/294-left.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/294-left.png)


∀-*I*: If **Fa** has been proved for an "arbitrary
**a**," then ∀**xFx** holds. The presupposition that **a**
is "completely arbitrary" can be expressed more
precisely as: **Fa** must not depend on any assump-
tion in which the object variable **a** occurs. And
this, again, with the obvious requirement that
*every occurrence* of **a** in **Fa** must be replaced by an **x**
in **Fx**, constitutes precisely the part of the "restric-
tions on variables" relative to the schema of the
∀-*I*.

∃-*E*: We have ∃**xFx**. We then say: Suppose **a** is
an object for which **F** holds, i.e., assume that **Fa**
holds. (It is, of course, obvious that for **a** we must
take an object variable which does not yet occur
in ∃**xFx**.) If, on this assumption, we then prove a
proposition **C** which no longer contains **a** and does
not depend on any other assumption containing
**a**, we have proved **C** independently of the assump-
tion **Fa**. We have here stated the part of the
"restrictions on variables" that concerns the ∃-*E*.
(A certain analogy exists between the ∃-*E* and the
∨-*E* since the existential quantifier is indeed the
generalization of ∨; and the universal quantifier
the generalization of &.)

┬-*E*: **A** and ¬ **A** signify a contradiction, and
this cannot obtain (law of contradiction). This is
formally expressed by the inference figure ┬-*E*,
where **F** designates "the contradiction," "the
false."

┬-*I*: (*Reductio ad absurdum*.) If we can derive any
false proposition (**F**) on an assumption **A**, then **A**
is not true, i.e., ¬ **A** holds.

The schema **F**
           **D**

If a false proposition holds, any arbitrary pro-
position also holds.

The interpretation of the remaining inference
figure schemata is straightforward.

§4.

*Representation of the three examples of §1
as NJ-Derivations*

First example (1.1):

```txt
                    1                1   Y & Z
                    X                X   ——— &-E   Y & Z
                ————— ∨-I   ————— ∨-I   Y         Z    &-E
            2   X∨Y         X∨Z       ————— &-I ————— &-I
X∨(Y & Z)  (X∨Y) & (X∨Z)        X∨Y       X∨Z
————————————————————————————————————————————— ∨-E 1
        (X∨Y) & (X∨Z)
    ——————————————————————————————— ⊃-I 2
    (X∨(Y & Z)) ⊃ ((X∨Y) & (X∨Z))
```

<!--  <./segments/294-right.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/294-right.png)


In this example the tree form must appear
somewhat artificial since it does not bring out the
fact that it is *after* the enunciation of X ∨ (Y & Z)
that we distinguish the cases X, Y & Z.

Second example (1.2):

```txt
                            ∀y Fay
                            ―――――  ∀-E
                             Fab        
                    2                   ∃-I
                             ∃x Fxb    ――――
        ∃x ∀y Fxy      ∀y ∃x Fxy      ∀-I
        ―――――――――      ―――――――――      ∃-E 1
           ∀y ∃x Fxy                   
                                       ⊃-I 2
    (∃x ∀y Fxy) ⊃ (∀y ∃x Fxy)
```

If we were to use *linear* ordering, then here too
the assumption of the ∃-E would quite naturally
*follow* the upper formula on the left, as was the
case in our treatment of that example in §1.

Third example (1.3):

```txt
        2                1
       ――                
       Fa    ∃-I         
      ―――――              ┐ ∃xFx
      ∃xFx               ┐      ┐-E
                   F            
                        
                   ┐ Fa  ┐-I2
                   ――――――
                        
       ∀y ┐ Fy    ∀-I
       ―――――――         
                              ⊃-I1
    (┐ ∃xFx) ⊃ (∀y ┐ Fy)
```

§5.

*Some Remarks Concerning the Calculus NJ.*
*The Calculus NK*

5.1. The calculus NJ lacks a certain formal
elegance. This has to be put against the following
advantages:

5.11. A close affinity to actual reasoning, which
had been our fundamental aim in setting up the
calculus. The calculus lends itself in particular to
the formalization of mathematical proofs.

5.12. In most cases the derivations for valid
formulae in our calculus are *shorter* than their
counterparts in logistic calculi. This is so primarily
because in logistic derivations one and the same
formula usually occurs (because of times as part
of other formulae), whereas this happens only very
rarely in the case of NJ-derivations.

5.13. The designations given to the various
inference figures (2.21) make it plain that our
calculus is remarkably *systematic*. To every logical
symbol &, ∨, ∀, ∃, ⊃, ┐ there are one or two

