<!--  <../page-segments/298-left.md> -->
[â†—](../image-segments/298-left.png)


have to change the respective scope of the symbols,
e.g., for B âˆ¨ A we have to put A&B), then another
*LK*-derivation results.

This can be seen at once from the schemata.
(Special care was taken to order them in such a way
as to bring out this relation).

(Cf. H-A's duality principle, p. 62).

2.41. In any case, the âŠƒ-symbol may, in a well-
known manner, be eliminated from the calculus
ğ’©ğ’¦, by regarding AâŠƒB as an abbreviation for
(Â¬A) âˆ¨ B. It may easily be shown that the
schemata for the âŠƒ-ğ’¥ and the âŠƒ-ğ’®â„ can then be
replaced by the schemata for âˆ¨ and Â¬.

The calculus ğ’©ğ’¥ has no corresponding property.

2.5. The most important fact for us with regard
to the calculi ğ’µğ’¥ and ğ’µğ’¦ is the following:

**Hauptsatz.** Every ğ’µğ’¥- or ğ’µğ’¦-derivation can be
transformed into an ğ’µğ’¥- or ğ’µğ’¦-derivation that has
the same endsequent and in which the inference
figure termed a "cut" does not occur.

2.51. The proof follows in Â§3.

In order to give greater clarity to the meaning of
the *Hauptsatz*, we prove a simple corollary (2.513).

For this purpose we introduce a number of
expressions (which will be needed frequently later
on) relating to operational inference figures.

2.511. That ğ’®-formula which contains the logical
symbol in its schema will be called the *principal
formula* of an inference figure.

For the &-ğ’®â„ and the &-ğ’®ğ’œ this is simply the
ğ’®-formula of the form A&B; for the âˆ¨-ğ’®â„ and the
âˆ¨-ğ’®ğ’œ it is A âˆ¨ B; for the âˆ€-ğ’®â„ and the âˆ€-ğ’®ğ’œ it is
âˆ€xâ„±x; for the âˆƒ-ğ’®â„ and the âˆƒ-ğ’®ğ’œ it is âˆƒxâ„±x; for the
Â¬-ğ’®â„ and the Â¬-ğ’®ğ’œ it is Â¬A; and for the âŠƒ-ğ’®â„
and the âŠƒ-ğ’®ğ’œ it is AâŠƒB.

The ğ’®-formulae designated by A, B, â„±a in the
schemata we call *side formulae* of their correspond-
ing inference figures.

They are always subformulae of the principal
formula (according to the definition of a subformula
in I, 2.2).

2.512. We can now easily read off the following
facts from the inference figure schemata: A
principal formula occurs always in the lower
sequent, a side formula always in the upper
sequent or in one upper sequent.

In the case of a formula occurring as an ğ’®-
formula in an upper sequent of an arbitrary
inference figure without being a side formula or the
D of a cut, it occurs also in the lower sequent as an
ğ’®-formula.

These two facts entail the following:

If anywhere in an ğ’µğ’¥- or ğ’µğ’¦-derivation a

<!--  <../page-segments/298-right.md> -->
[â†—](../image-segments/298-right.png)


formula occurs as an *S*-formula, and if we trace the
branch of the derivation from the formula con-
cerned up to the endsequent, the formula can only
then vanish from that branch if it is the **D** of a cut
or the side formula of an operational inference
figure. In the latter case, however, there appears
in the next sequent, the *principal formula* of the
inference figure of which our side formula is a
subformula. To that principal formula we can
then, continuing downwards, apply the same
consideration, and so on. Thus we obtain the
following corollary:

2.513. *Corollary of the Hauptsatz (subformula
property)*: In an *LJ*- or *LK*-derivation without
cuts, all occurring *D*-*S*-formulae are subformulae of
the *S*-formula that occurs in the endsequent.

2.514. Intuitively speaking, these properties of
derivations without cuts may be expressed as
follows: The *S*-formulae become larger as we
descend lower down in the derivation, never
shorter. The final result is, as it were, gradually
built up from its constituent elements. The proof
represented by the derivation is not roundabout
in that it contains only concepts which recur in the
final result (cf. the synopsis at the beginning of this
paper).

*Example*: The derivation given above (1.3) for
âŸ¶(â¬œâˆƒxğ…x) âŠƒ (âˆ€ ğ² â¬œğ…ğ²) may be written without
a cut as follows:

```txt
                     Fa âŸ¶ Fa
           Fa âŸ¶ âˆƒxFx  âˆƒ-IS
      â¬œâˆƒxFx, Fa âŸ¶     â¬œ-IA
    Fa, â¬œâˆƒxFx âŸ¶       Interchange
```

etc., as above.

Â§3.

*Proof of the Hauptsatz*

The *Hauptsatz* runs as follows:

Every *LJ*- or *LK*-derivation can be transformed
into another *LJ*- or *LK*-derivation with the same
endsequent, in which no cuts occur.

3.1. *Proof of the Hauptsatz for LK-derivations.*

We introduce a new inference figure (in order to
facilitate the proof) that constitutes a modified
form of the cut, and which we call a *mix*.

The schema of that figure runs as follows:

```txt
      Î“ âŸ¶ Î˜   Î” âŸ¶ Î›
      Î“, Î”* âŸ¶ Î˜*, Î›
```

In order to obtain an inference figure from this
schema, Î˜ and Î” must be replaced by sequences of

