<!--  <../page-segments/299-left.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/299-left.png)


formulae, separated by commas, in each of which
occurs at least once (as a member of the sequence)
a formula of the form M, called the "mix formula";
and *Θ*⁺ and *Δ** must be replaced by the same
sequences of formulae, save that all formulae of the
form M occurring as members of the sequence are
omitted. (M is an arbitrary formula.) *Γ* and *Λ* must
be replaced, as in the other schemata, by arbitrary
(possibly empty) sequences of formulae, separated
by commas.

Example of a mix:

```txt
A —→ B, ¬A   B ∨ C, B, B, D, B —→
        A, B ∨ C, D —→ ¬A
```

*B* is the mix formula.

We can prove that every cut may be trans-
formed into a mix by means of a number of
thinnings and interchanges. (Conversely, every mix
may be transformed into a cut by means of a certain
number of preceding interchanges and contrac-
tions, though we do not use this fact.)

In the following we shall consider only deriva-
tions in which no cuts occur. (Such may
contain mixes instead.

Since derivations in the old sense may be
transformed into derivations of the new kind, it
suffices, for the proof of the *Hauptsatz*, to show that
a derivation of the new type may be transformed
into a derivation with no mix.

Furthermore, the following lemma is already
sufficient:

*Lemma*: Any derivation with a mix for its
lowest inference figure, and not containing any
other mix, may be transformed into a derivation
(with the same endsequent) in which no mix
occurs.

From this the complete theorem easily follows:

In an arbitrary derivation consider a mix above
whose lower sequent no further mix occurs. The
derivation for this lower sequent is then of the kind
mentioned in the lemma, i.e., it may be transformed
in such a way that it no longer contains a mix. In
doing so, the rest of the derivation remains
unchanged. This operation is then repeated until
every mix has been completely been eliminated.

It now remains for us to establish the *proof of the
lemma*. (This proof extends into 3.2 incl.)

We have to consider a derivation whose lowest
inference figure is a mix and which contains no
other mix besides.

The length of the mix formula will be called the
"grade of the derivation" (defined in I, 2.2).

<!--  <../page-segments/299-right.md> -->
[↗](../image-segments/299-right.png)


We shall call "rank of the derivation" the sum of
its rank on the left and its rank on the right. These
two terms are defined as follows:

The left rank is the greatest number of sequents
connected on a branch such that the last sequent is
the *left-hand* upper sequent of the mix, where each
formula of the branch contains the mix formula in
the *succedent*.

The right rank is (correspondingly) the greatest
number of sequents connected on a branch whose
lowest sequent is the *right-hand* upper sequent of the
mix, and each formula of the branch contains the
mix formula in the *antecedent*.

The lowest possible rank is evidently 2.

To prove the lemma we perform two complete
inductions, one according to the grade γ, the
other according to the rank ρ of the derivation,
i.e., we prove the theorem for the derivation of
grade γ, assuming it to hold for derivations of a
lower grade (in so far as there are such derivations,
i.e., as long as γ is not equal to zero), supposing,
therefore, that derivations of a lower grade may
already be transformed into derivations not
containing a mix.

Furthermore, we shall begin by considering the
case where the rank ρ of the derivation equals 2
(3.11), and after that the case of ρ > 2 (3.12),
where we assume that the theorem already holds
for derivations of the same grade, but of a lower
rank.

In the following bold-face capital letters will
generally serve as syntactic variables for *formulae*,
and Greek capital letters as syntactic variables for
(possibly empty) *sequences of formulae*.

In transforming derivations, we shall occasionally
meet "identical inference figures," i.e., inference
figures with the same upper and lower sequent.
Since we have not admitted such figures in our
calculus, they must be eliminated as soon as they
occur; this is trivially possible by omitting one of
the two sequents.

The mix formula of the mix that occurs at the
end of the derivation is designated by **M**. It is of
grade γ.

3.10. *Re-designating of free object variables* in
preparation for the transformation of derivations.

We wish to obtain a derivation that has the
following properties:

3.101. For every ∀-IS (∃-IA) it holds that:
Its proper variable occurs in the derivation only
in sequents *above* the lower sequent of the ∀-IS
(∃-IA) and does not occur as a proper variable of
any other ∀-IS (∃-IA).

