<!--  <./segments/300-left.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/300-left.png)


3.102. This is achieved by re-designating the free
object variables in the following way:

We take a ∀–*IS* (∃–*IA*) above whose lower
sequent either no further inference figures of this
kind occur, or if they do, they have already been
dealt with in a way to be outlined.

In all sequents above the lower sequent of this
inference figure we replace the proper variables by
one and the same free object variable which, so
far, has not yet occurred in the derivation. This
obviously leaves the validity of the ∀–*IS* (∃–*IA*)
as such unchanged. (The proper variables did in
fact not occur in its lower sequent.) Furthermore
the remainder of the derivation remains correct, as
is shown by the immediately following lemma:

By applying this method systematically to every
single ∀–*IS* and ∃–*IA*, the derivation thus remains
correct throughout and at the conclusion obviously
has the desired property (3.101). Furthermore, as
was essential, the grade and rank of the derivation
as well as its endsequent have remained unaltered.

3.103. Now we give the still outstanding proof of
the following *lemma*. (It is enunciated in a some-
what more general form than is immediately
necessary, since we shall have to apply it again
later on (3.113.33).)

"An *LK*-basic sequent or inference figure turns into
a basic sequent or inference figure of the same
kind, if we replace a free object variable, which is *not
the proper variable* of the inference figure, in all its
occurrences in the basic sequent or inference figure, by
one and the same free object variable, provided again
that that is *not the proper variable* of the inference
figure."

This holds trivially except for the ∀–*IS*, the
∀–*IA*, the ∃–*IS* and the ∃–*IA*. Yet even here there
is no cause for concern: the restrictions on variables
are not violated, since we may neither substitute
nor replace the proper variable. (This is the reason
why both restrictions on variables are necessary.)
Furthermore, the formula resulting from **Fa** is still
obtained by substituting a for x in the formula
resulting from **Fx**.

Having prepared the way (3.10), we now
proceed to the actual transformation of the
derivation which serves to eliminate the mix
occurring in it.

As already mentioned, we distinguish two cases:
ρ = 2 (3.11) and ρ > 2 (3.12).

3.11. Suppose ρ = 2.

We distinguish between a number of particular
cases of which we specify only the first (3.111)

<!--  <./segments/300-right.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/300-right.png)


are especially simple in that they allow the mix to be
immediately eliminated. The other cases (3.113.3)
are the most important since their consideration
brings out the basic idea behind the whole trans-
formation. Here we use the induction hypothesis
with respect to γ, i.e., we reduce each one of the
cases to transformed derivations of a lower grade.

3.111. Suppose the left-hand upper sequent of the
mix at the end of the derivation is a *basic sequent*.
The mix then reads:

```txt
     M —→ M   Δ —→ Λ
     ——————————————————
       M, Δ* —→ Λ
```

which is transformed into:

```txt
     Δ —→ Λ       possibly several interchanges
   ——————————     and contractions.
   M, Δ* —→ Λ
```

That part of the derivation which is above
*Δ —→ Λ* remains the same, and we thus already
have a derivation without a mix.

3.112. Suppose the right-hand upper sequent of
the mix is a *basic sequent*. The treatment of this case
is symmetric to that of the previous one. We have
only to repeat the two schemata as follows:

3.113. Suppose that neither the left- nor the
right-hand upper sequent of the mix is a basic
sequent. Then both are *lower sequents of inference
figures* since ρ = 2, and the right and left rank both
equal 1, i.e. In the sequents directly above the
left-hand upper sequent of the mix the mix formula
**M** does not occur in the *succedent*; in the sequents
directly above the *right-hand* upper sequent **M** does
not occur in the *antecedent*.

Now the following holds generally: If a formula
occurs in the antecedent (succedent) of the lower
sequent of an inference figure, it is either a principal
formula or the **D** of a thinning, or else it also
occurs in the antecedent (succedent) in at least one
upper sequent of the inference figure.

This is true immediately by looking at the
inference figure schemata (1.21, 1.22).

If we now consider the assumptions of the
following three cases, we see at once that they
exhaust all the possibilities that exist within case
3.113.

3.113.1. Suppose the left-hand upper sequent of
the mix is the lower sequent of a *thinning*. Then the
conclusion of the derivation runs:

```txt
         Γ —→ Θ
    ———————————————————
    Γ —→ Θ, M   Δ —→ Λ
    ———————————————————
       Γ, Δ* —→ Θ, Λ
```

