<!--  <./segments/301-left.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/301-left.png)


This is transformed into:

```txt
     Γ → Θ       possibly several thinnings
───────────────── 
Γ, Δ* → Θ, Δ     and interchanges.
```

That part of the derivation which occurs above
Δ → Δ disappears.

3.113.2. Suppose the right-hand upper sequent of
the mix is the lower sequent of a thinning. This
case can be dealt with symmetrically to the
previous one.

3.113.3. The mix formula **M** occurs both in the
succedent of the left-hand upper sequent and in
the antecedent of the right-hand upper sequent
solely as the *principal formula* of one of the opera-
tional inference figures.

Depending on whether the terminal symbol of **M**
is &, ∨, ⊃ or ¬, we distinguish the cases
3.113.31 to 3.113.36 (a formula without logical
symbols cannot be a principal formula).

3.113.31. Suppose the terminal symbol of **M** is
&. In that case the end of the derivation runs:

```txt
Γ₁→ Θ₁, A    Γ₁→ Θ₁, B         A, Γ₂→ Θ₂
────────────────────── &-IS  ────────────── &-IA
    Γ₁→ Θ₁, A & B           A & B, Γ₂→ Θ₂
    ───────────────────────────────────── mix
              Γ₁, Γ₂→ Θ₁, Θ₂
```

(and correspondingly for the other form of the
&-IA, treated analogously.)

We transform it into:

```txt
Γ₁→ Θ₁, A    A, Γ₂→ Θ₂
──────────────────────── mix
    Γ₁, Γ₂*→ Θ₁*, Θ₂    possibly several thinnings
    ─────────────────────
    Γ₁, Γ₂ → Θ₁,  Θ₂    and interchanges.
```

We can now apply the induction hypothesis with
respect to γ to that part of the derivation whose
lowest sequent is Γ₁, Γ₂*→ Θ₁*, Θ₂, because it has
a lower grade than γ. (A obviously contains fewer
logical symbols than A&B.) This means that the
whole derivation may be transformed into one with
no mix.

3.113.32. Suppose the terminal symbol of **M** is ∨.
This case is to be dealt with symmetrically to the
previous one.

3.113.33. Suppose the terminal symbol of **M** is
⊃. Then the end of the derivation runs:

```txt
Γ₁→ Θ₁,  Fa              Fb, Γ₂→ Θ₂
─────────── ∀-IS    ──────────────── ∀-IA
Γ₁→ Θ₁, ∀xFx       ∀xFx, Γ₂→ Θ₂
          ─────────────────────── mix.
            Γ₁, Γ₂→ Θ₁, Θ₂
```

<!--  <./segments/301-right.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/301-right.png)


This is transformed into:

```txt
Γ₁⟶ Θ₁, Fb    Fb, Γ₂⟶ Θ₂
─────────────────────────── mix
Γ₁, Γ₂*⟶ Θ₁*, Θ₂ possibly several thinnings
─────────────────── and interchanges.
Γ₁, Γ₂⟶ Θ₁, Θ₂
```

Above the left-hand upper sequent of the mix,
Γ₁⟶ Θ₁, **Fb**, we write the same part of the
derivation which previously occurred above
Γ₁⟶ Θ₁, **Fa**, yet having replaced every occurrence
of the free variable **a** by **b**. It follows therefore,
from the lemma 3.103, together with 3.101, that in
performing this operation the part of the deriva-
tion *above* Γ₁⟶ Θ₁, **Fb** has again become a
correct part of the derivation. (By virtue of 3.101
neither **a** nor **b** can be the proper variable of an
inference figure occurring in that part of the
derivation.) The same consideration may be
applied to that part of the derivation which
*includes* the sequent Γ₁⟶ Θ₁, **Fb**, since it too
results from Γ₁⟶ Θ₁, **Fa** by substitution of **b** for
**a**. It is now in fact clear that by virtue of the
occurring free variables for **x**–*IS*, **a** could have
occurred neither in Γ₁ and Θ₁, nor in **Fx**. Further-
more, **Fa** results from **Fx** by substituting **a** for **x**,
and **Fb** from **Fx** by substituting **b** for **x**. This is
why **Fb** results from **Fa** by substituting **b** for **a**.

The mix formula **Fb** in the new derivation has a
lower grade than γ. Therefore, according to the
induction hypothesis, the mix may be eliminated.

3.113.34. Suppose the terminal symbol of **M** is
∃. This case is resolved symmetrically to the
previous one.

3.113.35. Suppose the terminal symbol of **M** is
⊃. Then the end of the derivation runs:

```txt
A, Γ₁⟶Θ₁                    Γ₂⟶Θ₂, A
───────────⊃A  ⊃IS  ⊃A, Γ₂⟶Θ₂        ⊃IA
Γ₁⟶Θ₁, ⊃A       ─────────────────────────
                 Γ₁, Γ₂⟶Θ₁, Θ₂            mix.
```

This is transformed into:

```txt
Γ₂⟶ Θ₂, A    A, Γ₁⟶ Θ₁
───────────────────────── mix
Γ₂, Γ₁*⟶ Θ₂*, Θ₁ possibly several inter-
───────────────────── changes and thinnings.
Γ₁, Γ₂⟶ Θ₁, Θ₂
```

The new mix may be eliminated by virtue of the
induction hypothesis.

3.113.36. Suppose the terminal symbol of **M** is
⊃. Then the end of the derivation runs:

