<!--  <./segments/306-left.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/306-left.png)


**3.232.22.** In the cases that are symmetric to
**3.121.2**, the mix in the end of the derivation runs:

```txt
      Ω —→ M   Σ —→ Π
      ——————————————————
         Ω, Σ*—→ Π
```

where *Π* contains at most *one* S-formula, and
where **Ω —→ M** is the lower sequent of an *LJ*-
inference figure in which at least one upper
sequent contains **M** as a succedent formula.

If we now look at the inference figure schemata
**1.21, 1.22**, it becomes easily apparent that such an
inference figure can only be a thinning, contraction,
or interchange in the antecedent, or a ∨-*IA*, a
&-*IA*, a ∃-*IA*, a ∀-*IA*, and a ⊃-*IA*. Let us
disregard for the moment the ∨-*IA* and the ⊃-*IA*.
Then all the possibilities enumerated above fall
within the case symmetric to **3.121.1**, where

<!--  <./segments/306-right.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/306-right.png)


both Ψ and Ξ always remain empty. (Γ corresponds
to the Θ of the inference figure.) Thus we have the
case which is symmetric to 3.121.221. Further-
more, Γ is equal to **M**, i.e., Γ* is empty, and Π
contains at most one formula. Hence, in the
derivation there never in fact occurs more than one
formula in the succedent of a sequent.

The case of a ∨-*IA* is symmetric to 3.121.231.
Again, Γ is equal to **M**, Γ* is empty, and Π con-
tains at most one formula; all is thus in order.

There now remains the case of a ⊃-*IA*, i.e.,
3.122.1. In an *LJ*- ⊃-*IA*, the Θ of the schema
(1.22) is empty. Thus we have the case set out
under 3.122.12. Λ* is also empty, and Π contains
at most one formula, which means that here, too,
we again obtain an *LJ*-derivation from an *LJ*-
derivation.

<!--  <./segments/306-zz-glossary-left.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/306-zz-glossary-left.png)


*All-Zeichen*—universal quantifier

*Annahmeformel*—assumption formula

*Antezedenz*—antecedent

*Äußerstes Zeichen*—terminal symbol

*Eigenvariable*—proper variable

*Es-gibt-Zeichen*—existential quantifier

*Faden*—branch

*Folge-Zeichen*—implication symbol

*Grad*—grade

*Grundformel*—basic formula

*Hauptformel*—principal formula

*Hauptsatz*—*Hauptsatz*

*Herleitung*—derivation

*Hilfssatz*—lemma

*Inhaltlicher Sinn*—intuitive sense

*Logische-Zeichen-Schlußfigur*—operational inference figure

*Mischformel*—mix formula

*Mischung*—mix

*Mittelungszeichen*—syntactic variable

*Nebenformel*—side formula

*Nicht-Zeichen*—negation symbol

<!--  <./segments/306-zz-glossary-right.md> -->
[↗](../images/segments/306-zz-glossary-right.png)


*Oberformel*—upper formula  
*Obersequenz*—upper sequent  
*Oder-Zeichen*—disjunction symbol  
*Rang*—rank  
*Satz*—theorem  
*Schließen*—deduction  
*Schluß*—inference  
*Schnitt*—cut  
*Sequenz*—sequent  
*Spiegelbildlich*—dual  
*Stammbaumform*—tree form  
*Struktur-Schlußfigur*—structural inference figure  
*Sukzedenz*—succedent  
*Teilformel*—subformula  
*Und-Zeichen*—conjunction symbol  
*Untersequenz*—lower sequent  
*Verdünnung*—thinning  
*Vertauschung*—interchange  
*Zeichen für Bestimmtes*—constant symbol  
*Zusammenziehung*—contraction

